Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
1 of 11
IMMUNOLOGY
Deep learning reveals predictive sequence concepts 
within immune repertoires to immunotherapy
John-William Sidhom1,2,3,4*, Giacomo Oliveira5,6, Petra Ross-MacDonald7, Megan Wind-Rotolo7, 
Catherine J. Wu5,6,8,9, Drew M. Pardoll1,2, Alexander S. Baras1,2,10
T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing has been used to characterize the immune response to cancer. However, most 
analyses have been restricted to quantitative measures such as clonality that do not leverage the complementarity- 
determining region 3 (CDR3) sequence. We use DeepTCR, a framework of deep learning algorithms, to reveal se-
quence concepts that are predictive of response to immunotherapy. We demonstrate that DeepTCR can predict 
response and use the model to infer the antigenic specificities of the predictive signature and their unique dynamics 
during therapy. The predictive signature of nonresponse is associated with high frequencies of TCRs predicted to 
recognize tumor-specific antigens, and these tumor-specific TCRs undergo a higher degree of dynamic changes 
on therapy in nonresponders versus responders. These results are consistent with a biological model where the 
hallmark of nonresponders is an accumulation of tumor-specific T cells that undergo turnover on therapy, possibly 
because of the dysfunctional state of these T cells in nonresponders.
INTRODUCTION
The advent of checkpoint inhibition [–programmed death 1 (-PD1) 
and –cytotoxic T lymphocyte associated protein 4 (-CTLA4)] in 
cancer has changed the landscape of how oncologists understand 
and treat advanced and aggressive disease (1–3). The initial trials of 
checkpoint inhibition or blockade demonstrated the possibility 
for obtaining durable clinical benefit in advanced metastatic cancer 
(4–6); however, while there has been tremendous promise of im-
munotherapy, most patients still do not respond to this mode of 
treatment (6). Thus, great attention has been made to the develop-
ment of predictive biomarkers to select for which patients may benefit 
the most from immunotherapy and to further our understanding of 
successful use of checkpoint blockade in cancer (7–20).
One promising area of interest has been examining the T cell 
response through broad analysis of the T cell repertoire via T cell 
receptor sequencing (TCR-seq), where the TCR sequence is obtained 
through next-generation sequencing, allowing for a characterization 
of the antigenic determinants of response (12, 13, 21–23). However, 
the vast majority of the work in this area has been limited to charac-
terizing the diversity of the TCR repertoire (either at the clonotype 
or structural level) (24–32). Previous work has demonstrated that 
certain sequence concepts can predict tumor types (33) but has yet 
to be applied in an effort to predict response to immunotherapy, 
and thus, we wanted to query whether there were sequence concepts 
(i.e., motifs) that were predictive of response to immunotherapy.
We used the repertoire classifier from DeepTCR, a previously 
described set of deep learning algorithms, to search for sequence 
concepts that were predictive of response to immunotherapy (22, 23). 
We applied DeepTCR to a clinical trial dataset (CheckMate-038) 
where patients with inoperable melanoma received either -PD1 or 
-PD1 +  -CTLA4, were sequenced before and after initiation of 
therapy and where the ground truth label corresponds to radio-
graphic response via RECIST v1.1 criterion. This analysis not only 
represents the value of DeepTCR as a pre-treatment biomarker pre-
dictive of response in a clinical immunotherapy setting, reanalyzing 
recently published TCR-seq data from Anagnostou et al. (21), but 
we further use this predictive modeling to reveal biological insights 
into the antigenic determinants of response and their dynamics 
under the influence of immunotherapy.
RESULTS
Extending DeepTCR’s repertoire classifier with human 
leukocyte antigen
We first expand our previously described multiple-instance learn-
ing (MIL) repertoire classifier by allowing for incorporation of the 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) into the featurization of the TCR 
to provide a representation of a joint TCR-HLA antigenic latent 
space (Fig. 1). This is particularly important when analyzing human- 
derived data as individuals often have different HLA backgrounds 
and their tumors have unique mutation-associated neoantigens and 
tumor-associated antigens; thus, TCRs that are structurally homolo-
gous would likely not be recognizing the same tumor antigens if 
being compared from patients with different HLA backgrounds. By 
incorporating HLA into the featurization of the TCR, we provide 
contextualization of the TCR by the HLA background it was observed 
within and thus allow direct comparisons between individuals/
patients with differing HLA backgrounds.
DeepTCR’s repertoire classifier is predictive of response
We first applied DeepTCR to the pre-treatment tumor specimens 
from the cohort of patients enrolled in the CheckMate-038 clinical 
trial (fig. S1). Pre-treatment tumor biopsies were collected and TCR-
seq was performed from 43 patients enrolled in the CheckMate-038 
(parts 2 to 4) clinical trial where they were either treated with -PD1 
monotherapy (9 patients) or -PD1 + -CTLA combination therapy 
1Bloomberg Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 2The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 3Depart-
ment of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. 4Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 
5Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. 
6Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 7Bristol Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ, 
USA. 8Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 9Department of 
Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 10Department of 
Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: johnwilliamsidhom@gmail.com
Copyright © 2022 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
2 of 11
(34 patients) and followed for radiographic response to therapy via 
RECIST v1.1. Complete responders and partial responders (CRPR) 
were denoted as responders to therapy while stable disease and pro-
gressive disease (SDPD) were denoted as nonresponders to therapy. 
We observed that when applying DeepTCR to predict response to 
immunotherapy, the joint representation of TCR with HLA out-
performed models of DeepTCR that used TCR sequence or HLA 
genotype information alone [area under curves (AUCs); TCR = 0.77, 
HLA = 0.75, TCR + HLA = 0.86, random permutation testing = 0.515; 
Fig. 2A, stratified by treatment cohort in fig. S2]. The resulting 
DeepTCR’s TCR + HLA model predictions of likelihood to respond 
to treatment also significantly stratified progression-free survival 
(PFS) in this cohort of patients (Fig. 2B). The TCR + HLA model 
exhibited less variability during cross-validation assessments as 
compared with either the TCR or HLA model alone (fig. S3), and it 
appears that the addition of HLA genotype conditions the model to 
learn different information from the TCR sequence data (fig. S4). 
We also found that in this cohort, the DeepTCR TCR + HLA model 
performed comparably to conventional biomarkers that have been 
previously described to stratify response in immunotherapy-treated 
patients [AUCs; programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1; immuno-
histochemistry tumor proportion score) = 0.693, total mutational 
burden (TMB; exome based) = 0.772, TCR clonality = 0.642, and total 
T cell count = 0.825; fig. S5]. In addition, while similar performance 
(based on AUC) is observed with total T cell counts (a surrogate of 
the degree of T cell tumor infiltration) and DeepTCR, these predic-
tors are independent of multivariate logistic regression analyses and 
as such plausibly represent complementary information. To further 
validate our findings, we collected two independent validation 
cohorts of patients (denoted as yost and sade) with skin cancer who 
were treated with checkpoint blockade and underwent either bulk 
TCR-seq or single-cell TCR-seq before initiation of treatment 
(34, 35). When using the 100 models fit in Monte Carlo (MC) cross- 
validation on the CheckMate-038 dataset in ensemble on these two 
cohorts of patients, we found the predictive signature of response in 
varying degrees in both these cohorts before initiation of treatment 
[AUCs: yost = 0.82 (n  = 11), sade = 0.61 (n  = 19), and yost + 
sade = 0.71 (n = 30)], providing further validation of this predictive 
signature of response to checkpoint blockade (Fig. 2C).
Unsupervised representation reveals nature of predictive 
antigenic response
To characterize the distribution of the TCR repertoires in patients 
who either responded or did not respond to treatment, we trained a 
variational autoencoder (VAE), another type of model part of the 
DeepTCR framework (22), on all data to obtain an unsupervised 
featurization to visualize [via uniform manifold approximation and 
projection (UMAP)] the distribution of nonresponders and responders 
Fig. 1. HLA-extended, MIL-supervised TCR repertoire model. We expand on previous work by modifying the TCR featurization block to incorporate the HLA background 
within which a given collection of TCRs were observed. The HLA background of a sample/individual is provided to the neural network in a multihot representation that 
is re-represented in a learned continuous embedding layer and concatenated to the continuous learned representation of the TCR. As previously described, we 
implement a multihead attention mechanism to make sequence assignments to concepts within the sample. The number of concepts in the model is a hyperparameter, 
which can be varied by the user depending on the heterogeneity expected in the repertoires. Notably, this assignment of a sequence to a concept is done through an 
adaptive activation function that outputs a value between 0 and 1, allowing the network to put attention on the sequences that are relevant to the learning task. When 
taking the average of these assignments over all the cells in a repertoire, this results in a value within the neural network that directly corresponds to the proportion of 
the repertoire that is described by that learned concept. These proportions of concepts in the repertoire are then sent into a final traditional classification layer. Adapted 
from Sidhom et al. (22), T. Phelps, Department of Art as Applied to Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. APC, antigen-presenting cell; MHC, major 
histocompatibility complex.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
3 of 11
(Fig. 3A; per sample distributions shown in fig. S6). While no 
difference in the overall distributions can be appreciated when looking 
at all the data, we found that when filtering the TCR sequences to 
the top and bottom 10% predictive sequences (Fig. 3B), we were able 
to visualize differences in the TCR repertoires between responders 
and nonresponders (Fig. 3C), illustrating the functionality of the MIL 
algorithm to “denoise” TCR repertoire. We noted that not only are the 
distributions within responders and nonresponders multimodal but 
also these multiple modes are shared between patients (Fig. 3D).
Predictive signature persists while on therapy
We next wanted to query whether this predictive signature of re-
sponse (pre-tx) persisted in the TCR repertoires taken post-treatment 
(post-tx). To do this, we applied the models (TCR, HLA, and 
TCR + HLA) trained on the pre-treatment data to 35 paired post-  
treatment samples and examined the receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curves and AUCs between pre-treatment and post-treatment 
(Fig. 4A). When doing this, the results demonstrated comparable 
performance between the pre-treatment and post-treatment samples, 
suggesting that the predictive signature was still present even weeks 
after initiating immunotherapy. Furthermore, we noted a high cor-
relation between the pre-treatment and post-treatment prediction 
values (Fig. 4B), suggesting maintenance of pre-treatment response- 
relevant repertoires during treatment. When comparing the 35 
paired pre- and post-treatment repertoires, examining the top 10% 
predictive sequences for each class (i.e., CRPR versus SDPD) either 
at the sample level (Fig.  4,  C  and  E) or entire cohort level 
(Fig. 4, D and F), we demonstrated a conserved predictive antigenic 
response while on therapy. Together, these findings suggest that the 
antigenic response is not only different between responders and 
nonresponders to checkpoint blockade, but each cohort of patients 
contains a set of T cell responses that likely recognize a broad class 
of structurally related antigens and these predictive concepts persist 
while on treatment.
Predictive signature of nonresponse is associated 
with tumor-specific TCRs
To further characterize the antigenic specificity of the antigenic 
response, we first created residue sensitivity logos as described in 
the original DeepTCR publication (22) of the top 50 most predictive 
TCRs of responders (CRPR) and nonresponders (SDPD) (Fig. 5A). 
We noted that the most predictive residues were localized to the 
central portion of the sequence, suggesting that the predictive signature 
was indeed related to the antigen specificity of the TCR. We then 
used a previously published dataset in melanoma by Oliveira et al. 
(36) where the authors had paired TCR sequence data with known 
specificities (i.e., viral versus neoantigen versus tumor-associated 
antigens), along with the known HLA background of the individuals 
from which the sequences were obtained. We took these TCRs and 
ran them through the previously trained DeepTCR repertoire classifier 
to assign per-sequence likelihoods of response versus nonresponse. 
We noted that when looking at the distribution of likelihoods across 
the various types of antigens, the virus-specific TCRs [Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV), Influenza (Flu), and yellow fever (YF)] had a higher 
likelihood of response than the tumor-specific TCRs [NeoAg and 
melanoma antigen recognized by T cells 1 (MART-1)] (Fig. 5, B and C). 
To further validate these findings, we pulled TCRs from the McPas-TCR 
database (37) and crossed exact sequences matches with the TCRs 
found within the CheckMate-038 cohort and then looked at the 
corresponding likelihood of response of these cross-matched TCRs. 
Once again, we noted a similar finding to the dataset of Oliveira et al. 
(36) in that the virus-specific TCRs (EBV, cytomegalovirus, flu, and 
YF) had a higher likelihood of response than the tumor-specific 
TCRs (MART-1) (Fig. 5D). When visualizing these virus-specific 
versus MART-1–specific TCRs in the unsupervised TCR sequence 
space, we also saw that the virus-specific TCRs were more enriched 
in the responder-specific areas and the MART-1–specific TCRs 
were more enriched in the nonresponder-specific areas of the 
UMAP (Fig. 5E).
Fig. 2. Repertoire classification in human pre-treatment tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. (A) Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were created for predicting 
response (complete response and partial response) to immunotherapy given TCR, HLA, or TCR + HLA information to the supervised repertoire classifier [100 Monte Carlo 
(MC) simulations with a train size of 37 and a test size of 6]. Bootstrap analyses (5000 iterations) were performed to construct confidence intervals (CI) around AUC values 
and assess differences in model performance, in which each AUC per sampling was compared in a paired manner across the three models designed above. The null 
hypothesis of two models exhibiting equivalent performance was rejected if the bootstrap difference did not cross 0 (***, 99.9% CI). NS, not significant. (B) The likelihood 
of response generated by the TCR + HLA model was dichotomized into “high” and “low” using the median predicted value in this cohort (taken over the MC test sets and 
averaged per sample) and the Kaplan-Meier curves were shown for PFS, log-rank P = 0.005. (C) Repertoire models fit on CheckMate-038 data were used to conduct repertoire 
level ensemble inference on two previously published cohorts of patients with skin cancer undergoing treatment with checkpoint blockade. Performance characteristics 
are shown via ROC curves for both cohorts independently and combined [yost (n = 11), sade (n = 19), and yost + sade (n = 30)]. Bootstrap analyses, as previously described, 
were performed to construct CIs around AUC values.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
4 of 11
Tumor-specific responses show more dynamic changes 
in nonresponders
Last, we wanted to understand whether there were any unique 
dynamic changes of these predictive TCRs. To do this, we first 
examined, at the clonotype level, the change in frequencies of TCR 
sequences present in the pre-treatment and on-treatment samples 
as a function of likelihood of being tumor versus virus specific 
(Fig. 5F). We noted that while the predicted virus-specific TCRs 
showed little change between nonresponders and responders, the 
tumor-specific TCRs found in the pre-treatment samples showed a 
marked decrease in frequency in nonresponders versus responders 
and the tumor-specific TCRs found in the post-treatment samples 
showed a marked increase in frequency in nonresponders versus 
responders. This finding suggests a more rapid turnover of tumor- 
versus viral-specific clones in nonresponders versus responders. 
When aggregating the change in frequencies over each patient, we 
further observed the same finding in that there was a higher turnover of 
tumor-specific clones in nonresponders versus responders (Fig. 5G), 
suggesting a futility of the tumor-specific response in nonresponders 
and a higher turnover of tumor-specific TCRs in these patients.
DISCUSSION
In this work, we sought to understand the T cell repertoire determi-
nants of response to immunotherapy in the clinical setting along 
with their potential antigen specificities. While there has been prior 
work in the field understanding the quantitative aspects of TCR 
repertoire (i.e., diversity, abundance, etc.), there has yet to be a 
study of the sequence motifs/concepts in the TCR repertoire that 
may predict response to immunotherapy. In this work, we use and 
expand on a previously described set of deep learning algorithms 
for TCR repertoire analysis to create models that not only predict 
clinical response but also allow us to understand and propose a 
biological model that explains the differences in TCR repertoire in 
responders/nonresponders.
Much of the prior work in the field of cancer immunology that 
attempts to understand the antigenic determinants of response to 
therapy often tackles the problem from the side of the presented 
epitope/antigen. Computational pipelines are set up to take whole-  
exome sequencing (WES) data and predict the presented epitope 
(7–9, 11, 12, 38). However, because of the many sequential steps/
algorithms that are required to go from mutation to immunologi-
cally relevant epitope (i.e., expression, proteosomal cleavage, major 
histocompatibility complex binding, and T cell recognition), these 
pipelines suffer in accuracy (39– 43). The benefit of interrogating 
the TCR sequences/repertoire directly is that this is a direct measure-
ment of the antigen-specific response in an immune response. The 
hurdle, however, has been to understand the antigenic information 
encoded in the TCR sequence, and other than direct empirical 
validation of TCR clones, there has existed no high-throughput, 
Fig. 3. Unsupervised representation of predictive signature. (A) To provide a descriptive understanding of the T cell response in responders and nonresponders in the 
CheckMate-038 clinical trial, we sought to characterize the distribution of the TCR repertoire in this cohort of patients. Data from CheckMate-038 were used to train a VAE 
on all sequence data (incorporating TCR + HLA information) in a sample and class agnostic fashion. The distribution of responders and nonresponders repertoires was 
visualized via UMAP of the unsupervised VAE featurization (per sample distribution shown in fig. S6). (B) To visualize the distribution of the highly predictive TCR sequences, 
a per-sequence prediction value was assessed following each MC simulation on the TCR’s within the independent test set, assigning the probability that a given TCR had 
a responder signature. Over the 100 MC simulations, each sequence in the cohort is assigned multiple prediction values that are averaged over all simulations to serve as a 
consensus predicted value for each sequence in this cohort of patients. (C) Top 10% of sequences in responders and nonresponders were selected and visualized over the 
entire cohort and on a per-sample basis (D) where edge color denotes the ground truth label of the sample (nonresponder, red; responder, blue) and average predicted 
likelihood taken over MC simulations to respond to treatment shown above each patient’s distribution.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
5 of 11
Fig. 4. Pre- versus post-treatment TCR repertoire. (A) All three respective models that were trained on pre-treatment repertoires were applied to 35 paired post-treatment 
TCR repertoires. Performance was then compared via visualizing ROC curves and bootstrapping the AUC to compare pre- versus post-treatment predictive signature. (B) For 
each pair of pre/post-treatment repertoires, the repertoire-level prediction was compared for pre- versus post-treatment across all trained models. To visualize distribution 
of predictive sequences, top 10% of predictive sequences in the 35 paired pre/postrepertoires were visualized across all paired samples (C and E) and over the entire 
cohort (D and F).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
6 of 11
efficient method to interrogate the antigen specificity of the TCR 
sequence. Thus, there has been an effort in the machine learning 
domain to attempt to extract this antigenic information from the 
TCR sequence including methods such as DeepTCR (used in this 
work) (22, 23, 44–50). While the field is still nascent, with more and 
more data to train these models, they have the potential to completely 
change how we understand the antigen specificity of immune 
response directly from the TCR repertoire, thus avoiding highly 
variable and inaccurate prediction methods that attempt to predict 
the relevant epitopes. In this work, we demonstrate how methods such 
as DeepTCR would be used in the future to not only create possible 
predictive biomarkers in cancer but also to extract meaningful bio-
logical insights from TCR repertoire.
In the first part of this study, we first expand on our previous work 
by integrating HLA into the representation of the TCR sequence. 
While the TCR sequence can be thought of as containing the infor-
mation required to understand antigen specificity, it really contains 
the information about the antigen/epitope in context of HLA. Given 
the high level of heterogeneity of the HLA alleles in the human popu-
lation, a TCR sequence cannot be guaranteed to respond to the same 
epitope/antigen in different individuals. Therefore, we created a method 
to create a joint representation of TCR sequence and HLA background 
within which it was observed in. This joint representation then be-
comes a more complete and reliable measure of the epitope and allows 
direct comparison of TCR repertoire between HLA-mismatched 
individuals. When applying this approach to predicting response, 
Fig. 5. Specificities and dynamics of predictive TCRs. (A) Residue sensitivity logos were created for the top 50 most predictive TCR sequences for responders (CRPR) 
and nonresponders (SDPD). (B) TCRs were collected from previous publication by Oliveria et al. (36) and are shown in phenotypic (derived from single-cell RNA sequencing) 
UMAP space and highlighted in red by antigen specificity (tumor- versus virus-specific TCRs), along with corresponding likelihood of response as determined by trained 
DeepTCR repertoire classifier. Likelihood of response distributions is shown for each class of antigen for the (C) Oliveria et al. (36) dataset and the (D) McPas-TCR database 
(orange, tumor specific; gray, virus specific). (E) Viral-specific versus MART-1–specific TCRs from McPas-TCR database present in the predictive TCRs from the CheckMate-038 
cohort are shown within the unsupervised TCR sequence space. Color corresponds to kernel density estimate for that point in sequence space. (F) Clonotype-specific 
changes in frequency between pre- and post-treatment are shown for TCRs in pre-tx and post-tx samples as a function of likelihood of being virus- versus tumor-specific. 
Each set of paired box plots represents probability ranges of 10% (i.e., first pair of box plots represents sequences with probability of 0 to 10% of being tumor 
specific). Mean values for each box plot are denoted with a green triangle. (G) Changes in frequency of sequences in each probability bin were aggregated over each 
patient and shown as a function of likelihood of being virus versus tumor specific, showing the net change in frequency of a given set of sequences within each patient.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
7 of 11
we do find that combining TCR sequence information and HLA 
background does improve predictive power of the model.
While the predictive power of the model is a key advantage of 
our approach in that we are able to aggregate the sum of TCR infor-
mation in an entire repertoire to predict relevant information about 
response to therapy, much of the work presented focused on the 
interpretability of the model with hopes to reveal previously un-
appreciated biological insights. We first use a VAE, a completely 
unsupervised method of TCR sequence representation to charac-
terize and visualize the predictive signature of response. When 
doing this, we find that our supervised MIL model did in fact pull 
out the relevant predictive signature from the background “noise” 
of TCR repertoire. In using an orthogonal method of validation 
with an unsupervised approach, this gave us further evidence that 
our supervised model had not become overfit to the data, and 
when looking at the distribution of the predictive sequences among 
each patient, we were able to observe the nature of a conserved TCR 
sequence signature in responders/nonresponders that was shared 
among multiple patients. This led us to ask the inevitable question 
about what could be the specificities of these predictive TCR sequenc-
es. By using two previously published datasets with known TCR to 
specificity relationships, we found that responders were enriched 
with a predictive signature that resembled a viral response, while 
nonresponders were enriched with a signature that resembled a 
tumor-specific response. While initially unexpected, we reasoned 
that the viral signature represents a background T cell response 
within the tumor [as has been validated in other studies (36)], and 
an accumulation of tumor-specific T cells in the nonresponders is 
relative to this background viral signature. Along with the previously 
published dataset that linked TCR sequence not only to antigen 
specificity but also to phenotype, we reasoned that this accumula -
tion of tumor-specific T cells represents terminally differentiated 
effector T cells that may have become dysfunctional, and hence, 
their accumulation in the nonresponders.
When studying the dynamics of these antigen-specific responses 
before and after initiation of immunotherapy, while the antigen-  
specific signature did not change on therapy, we were surprised to 
see that there was a higher turnover of tumor-specific T cells in the 
nonresponders. Taken all these observations together, we propose a 
biological model of the dynamics and antigen-specific characteristics 
under immunotherapy and how these characteristics differ between 
responders and nonresponders to therapy (Fig. 6). Notably, non-
responders are characterized by an accumulation of dysfunctional 
tumor-specific T cells that undergo a higher level of turnover when 
under immunotherapy treatment, suggesting a futility of the ongoing 
T cell response to the tumor. In contrast, responders maintain the 
existing tumor-specific response within the tumor and their function 
is rescued by immunotherapy treatment and thus, the T cells already 
present in the tumor are able to be effective in their antitumor activity.
Last, this biological model is consistent with findings already 
reported in previous transcriptomic studies in the field. In the study 
by Oliveira et al. (36), nonresponder patients were characterized by 
an accumulation of high levels of putative tumor-reactive T cells, 
which were significantly higher in nonresponder patients with 
melanoma. Such specificities, even if at high frequencies, were not able 
to confer a productive antitumor response, because of the high level 
of exhaustion, as measured within the tumor microenvironment 
through single-cell RNA (36). In line with this view, patients with 
melanoma with response to checkpoint blockade are characterized 
higher proportion of putative virus-specific T cells within the tumor 
specimens, while nonresponders are characterized by the accumu-
lation of exhausted tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (35, 36).
While the findings of this study demonstrate both a method by 
which to apply interpretable machine learning to TCR repertoire 
analysis and the biological insights one could appreciate, there are 
certainly limitations to this work. The most significant limitation of 
the study is the small size of the training/validation cohorts used in 
this study. Deep learning models are notorious for their ability to 
overfit to data, and there is much consideration in training these 
models so they do not overfit to spurious or irrelevant information. 
To address this major limitation, we made sure to only assess per-
formance of the model in the test set during cross-validation. Fur-
thermore, by corroborating the finding of this predictive sequence 
signature with a VAE, a completely unsupervised method, we were 
able to provide further evidence that our supervised model had not 
overfit to the data. Last, we validated the predictive signature in the 
original CheckMate-038 cohort in two additional clinical cohorts 
undergoing treatment with checkpoint blockade, providing further 
validation of the observed finding.
When taken together, these findings highlight the utility of methods 
in deep learning to identify key features of specificity in TCR reper-
toire and their dynamics under the influence of immunotherapy 
and how they relate to clinical response. Further work in this area 
might be able to leverage these described approaches for biomarker 
development as well as aid in the understanding and development 
of better targeted treatments in the age of precision oncology.
METHODS
CheckMate-038 experimental model and participant details
CheckMate-038 is a multi-arm, multi-institutional, institutional review 
board–approved, prospective study (CA209-038; NCT01621490). 
Fig. 6. Dynamics of tumor-specific T cells under immunotherapy. In the pre-treatment 
setting, nonresponders to immunotherapy have accumulated tumor-specific dys -
functional effector T cells. Following initiation of immunotherapy, nonresponders 
undergo a higher rate of turnover of tumor-specific T cells as compared with 
responders. Created with BioRender.com.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
8 of 11
Patients in parts 2 to 4 received either nivolumab (3 mg/kg) every 
2 weeks (n = 21) or nivolumab (1 mg/kg) + ipilimumab (3 mg/kg) 
every 3 weeks × 4 doses and then nivolumab (3 mg/kg) every 
2 weeks (n = 62), until progression or for a maximum of 2 years. 
Radiographic assessment of response was performed approximately 
every 8 weeks until progression. Progression was confirmed with a 
repeat computed tomography scan typically 4 weeks later. Tumor 
response for patients was defined by RECIST v1.1. Response to therapy 
indicates best overall response unless otherwise indicated. All patients 
underwent biopsy of a metastatic lesion before commencing therapy 
(1 to 7 days before first dose of therapy). Tumor tissue was divided for 
formalin-fixation, paraffin embedding (FFPE) or storage with RNA 
later (Ambion) for subsequent RNA/DNA extraction. PD-L1 ex -
pression on the tumor cell surface was assessed in FFPE samples at 
a central laboratory (Dako 28-8 antibody). The clinical trial protocol 
and its amendments were approved by the relevant institutional 
review boards, and the study was conducted in accordance with 
the Declaration of Helsinki and the International Conference on 
Harmonization Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice. All patients 
signed written informed consent before having any study proce-
dures performed.
CheckMate-038 TCR-seq and HLA data generation
Tumor biopsy samples were collected before initiation of therapy and 
stored in RNAlater. DNA was extracted and submitted to Adaptive 
Biotechnologies for survey-level TCR -chain sequencing, where tar-
geted amplicon libraries were prepared by multiplex polymerase chain 
reaction targeting all TCR -chain V/D/J gene segments and sequenced 
using the Illumina HiSeq system (51,  52). Data for individual TCR 
sequences, previously analyzed by Anagnostou et al. (21), including 
V/D/J gene segment identification and CDR3-  sequence, were 
obtained from Adaptive Biotechnologies for analysis via DeepTCR.  
Tumor biopsy DNA was also sent for WES (Personal Genome 
Diagnostics) to determine TMB, and OptiType was used to infer HLA 
genotype of the patients (53). Data from patients who consented 
to deposition will be submitted to the European Genome- phenome 
Archive (21).
Data curation
TCR-seq files were collected as raw tsv/csv-formatted files from the 
various sources cited within the manuscript. Sequencing files were 
parsed to take the amino acid sequence of the CDR3 after removing 
unproductive sequences. Clones with different nucleotide sequences 
but the same amino acid sequence were aggregated together under 
one amino acid sequence, and their reads were summed to deter-
mine their relative abundance. Within the parsing code, we addi-
tionally specified to ignore sequences that used non–International 
Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry letters (* , X, and O) and 
removed sequences that were greater than 40 amino acids in length. 
For the purpose of the algorithm, the maximum length can be 
altered, but we chose 40 as we did not expect any real sequences to 
be longer than this length.
Training DeepTCR repertoire classifier
To identify a predictive signature of response in the TCR repertoire 
of the tumor microenvironment before initiation of therapy, we 
used DeepTCR (v2.1.6), a deep learning framework for revealing 
sequence concepts within T cell repertoires (22). We make one sig-
nificant change to the existing software by allowing the incorporation 
of HLA information within the representation of the TCR. This is 
accomplished by representing the HLA background that a given 
TCR is observed within as a categorical multihot encoded variable 
as an input for the neural network. All other aspects of the approach 
are as initially described in the original manuscript in which Deep-
TCR was first presented. Notably, we fit the repertoire classifier on 
the CheckMate-038 data using TCR sequence information (CDR3- 
and V/D/J), HLA, or TCR + HLA information provided to demon-
strate the different types of information each of the inputs contributes 
to the predictive power of the model. For each type of input that was 
tested, the same exact train/test splits during MC cross-validation 
were used as to allow fair comparisons when comparing models 
trained with different input data. Furthermore, because of the small 
nature of the CheckMate-038 dataset, training had to be accomplished 
in a way to prevent overfitting of the repertoire classifier. Therefore, 
to train the repertoire classifier on these datasets, we used an MC 
cross-validation where in the hinge loss was used during model 
training, which prevents the model from further reducing the loss 
of any given sample below a defined threshold. The idea behind this 
type of objective function is that once a sample has been predicted 
sufficiently correct, the network is not encouraged to drop its loss 
any further and thus reduces overfitting on the training data. Model 
training with this hinge loss was stopped once a predefined 
threshold was meet, and in keeping MC cross-validation, model 
perform was assessed on the testing data of that train/test split. We 
then used a bootstrapping method where we sampled the MC 
predictions with replacement 5000 times to approximate a confi-
dence interval around the AUC. All hyperparameters for the 
DeepTCR models can be found in the publicly available GitHub 
repository as provided below in Acknowledgments (Data and 
materials availability).
Validation cohorts
TCR-seq data were collected from two previously published manu-
scripts denoted as yost (34) and sade (35), which consisted of patients 
with basal/squamous cell carcinoma and melanoma, respectively. 
The yost dataset consisted of samples from 11 patients who had 
TCR-seq available from pre-treatment biopsies and provided available 
on immuneACCESS, and the sade dataset consisted of samples 
from 19 patients who had TCR-seq available from pre-treatment 
biopsies and provided in the original publication materials. Both of 
these cohorts consisted of patients who were treated with checkpoint 
blockade therapy and were assessed for clinical response to treat-
ment via RECIST criteria, in a similar fashion as was performed 
within the CheckMate-038 cohort. The DeepTCR repertoire classi-
fiers that fit to the CheckMate-038 cohort were then used to conduct 
repertoire level inference on the patients within these two indepen-
dent clinical cohorts, and predictive performance was assessed via 
ROC and AUC measurements.
Unsupervised representations via VAE and UMAP
To provide interpretability of the predictive signature found, we 
used the DeepTCR VAE to do unsupervised dimensionality reduc-
tion of all TCRs found in the CheckMate-038 cohort. Each instance 
into the VAE is defined by a joint representation of CDR3-, V/D/J 
gene usage, and the HLA background the TCR was found within as 
previously described. Using the VAE, this input is transformed into 
a 128-dimensional latent vector before being further reduced to 
two dimensions via UMAP (default settings for python package 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
9 of 11
umap-learn). For the purpose of visualization, because each TCR 
also has a corresponding frequency associated with it, this informa-
tion was used to construct two-dimensional histograms to visualize the 
density of these TCRs in the UMAP latent space.
Post-treatment inference
To apply models from the pre-treatment cohort to the post-treatment 
cohort, we used a method to prevent overinflation of performance 
characteristics because the pre- and post-treatment samples are 
highly related (coming from the same patients). To do this, we only 
used models on individuals in the post-treatment setting that were 
not trained on those individuals’ pre-treatment tumors. In other 
words, when the model was trained on a given partition of the 
pre-treatment data and then was tested on the other partition (test set) 
of the pre-treatment data and the paired-test set’s post-treatment 
data. This type of cross-validation prevented the model from making 
a prediction on a patient it had been trained on, whether it be 
trained on pre- or post-treatment samples.
Linking predictive model to known antigen specificity
To interrogate the antigen specificity of the predictive signatures 
of response/nonresponse, we collected two previously published 
datasets that have empiric validation of CDR3 sequences to antigens/
epitopes. As our clinical cohort consists of patients with melanoma, 
we first use a melanoma relevant dataset where the authors es-
tablished links between TCR sequence, antigen specificity, and gene 
expression phenotype (36). We also use McPas-TCR, a larger 
dataset with TCR sequences and their known specificities (37). 
For the melanoma dataset (36), because this dataset had the CDR3- 
sequence, V/D/J gene usage, and HLA background of the indi-
viduals, we were able to score each TCR by running it through 
our pretrained model. In our analysis of the McPas-TCR database, 
to maximize the overlap of TCRs between our cohort of patients 
and those found in the database, we cross-matched TCRs from 
our clinical cohort (with predictive likelihoods) with TCRs in 
the McPas-TCR database at only the CDR3-  sequence level to 
assign known antigen-specific TCRs to their likelihood of response/
nonresponse.
Clonal dynamics as a function of likelihood  
of response
In the CheckMate-038 cohort, because there exists paired pre- and 
post-treatment biopsies for a subset of the patients, we wanted to 
interrogate the clonal dynamics in light of information provided by 
the predictive model of response. To do this, we divided all the TCR 
sequences into 10 ordinal categories representing the spectrum of 
virus- to tumor-specific TCRs as predicted by our model. We then 
further stratified these sequences by whether they were in respond-
ers (CRPR) or nonresponders (SDPD). We then looked at their 
clonal dynamics in reference to either their pre- or post-treatment 
frequencies. For the TCR sequences seen in the pre-treatment biop-
sies, we looked at their change in frequencies post-treatment with 
respect to their pre-treatment frequencies, and for the TCR sequences 
seen in the post-treatment biopsies, we looked at their change in 
frequencies pre-treatment with respect to their post-treatment fre-
quencies. To further quantify the dynamics of TCRs at the sample/
patient level, we aggregated the change in frequencies over each 
patient across the respective bins along the spectrum of virus- to 
tumor-specific to output a net change in frequency per patient.
Statistical tests and machine learning models
All statistical tests applied to data were implemented with the scipy.
stats module. Classical machine learning techniques and performance 
metrics were implemented with scikit-learn.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at https://science.org/doi/10.1126/
sciadv.abq5089
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. P. Sharma, J. P. Allison, The future of immune checkpoint therapy. Science 348, 56–61 (2015).
 2. S. L. Topalian, C. G. Drake, D. M. Pardoll, Immune checkpoint blockade: A common 
denominator approach to cancer therapy. Cancer Cell 27, 450–461 (2015).
 3. D. M. Pardoll, The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy. Nat. Rev. 
Cancer 12, 252–264 (2012).
 4. F. S. Hodi, S. J. O'Day, D. F. McDermott, R. W. Weber, J. A. Sosman, J. B. Haanen, 
R. Gonzalez, C. Robert, D. Schadendorf, J. C. Hassel, W. Akerley, A. J. M. van den Eertwegh, 
J. Lutzky, P. Lorigan, J. M. Vaubel, G. P. Linette, D. Hogg, C. H. Ottensmeier, C. Lebbé, 
C. Peschel, I. Quirt, J. I. Clark, J. D. Wolchok, J. S. Weber, J. Tian, M. J. Yellin, G. M. Nichol, 
A. Hoos, W. J. Urba, Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic 
melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 363, 711–723 (2010).
 5. C. Robert, L. Thomas, I. Bondarenko, S. O'Day, J. Weber, C. Garbe, C. Lebbe, J. F. Baurain, 
A. Testori, J. J. Grob, N. Davidson, J. Richards, M. Maio, A. Hauschild, W. H. Miller Jr., 
P. Gascon, M. Lotem, K. Harmankaya, R. Ibrahim, S. Francis, T. T. Chen, R. Humphrey, 
A. Hoos, J. D. Wolchok, Ipilimumab plus dacarbazine for previously untreated metastatic 
melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 2517–2526 (2011).
 6. S. L. Topalian, F. S. Hodi, J. R. Brahmer, S. N. Gettinger, D. C. Smith, D. F. McDermott, 
J. D. Powderly, R. D. Carvajal, J. A. Sosman, M. B. Atkins, P. D. Leming, D. R. Spigel, 
S. J. Antonia, L. Horn, C. G. Drake, D. M. Pardoll, L. Chen, W. H. Sharfman, R. A. Anders, 
J. M. Taube, T. L. McMiller, H. Xu, A. J. Korman, M. Jure-Kunkel, S. Agrawal, D. McDonald, 
G. D. Kollia, A. Gupta, J. M. Wigginton, M. Sznol, Safety, activity, and immune correlates 
of anti–PD-1 antibody in cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 2443–2454 (2012).
 7. A. Snyder, V. Makarov, T. Merghoub, J. Yuan, J. M. Zaretsky, A. Desrichard, L. A. Walsh, 
M. A. Postow, P. Wong, T. S. Ho, T. J. Hollmann, C. Bruggeman, K. Kannan, Y. Li, 
C. Elipenahli, C. Liu, C. T. Harbison, L. Wang, A. Ribas, J. D. Wolchok, T. A. Chan, Genetic 
basis for clinical response to CTLA-4 blockade in melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 
2189–2199 (2014).
 8. N. A. Rizvi, M. D. Hellmann, A. Snyder, P. Kvistborg, V. Makarov, J. J. Havel, W. Lee, J. Yuan, 
P. Wong, T. S. Ho, M. L. Miller, N. Rekhtman, A. L. Moreira, F. Ibrahim, C. Bruggeman, 
B. Gasmi, R. Zappasodi, Y. Maeda, C. Sander, E. B. Garon, T. Merghoub, J. D. Wolchok, 
T. N. Schumacher, T. A. Chan, Mutational landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 
blockade in non–small cell lung cancer. Science 348, 124–128 (2015).
 9. E. M. Van Allen, D. Miao, B. Schilling, S. A. Shukla, C. Blank, L. Zimmer, A. Sucker, U. Hillen, 
M. H. G. Foppen, S. M. Goldinger, J. Utikal, J. C. Hassel, B. Weide, K. C. Kaehler, C. Loquai, 
P. Mohr, R. Gutzmer, R. Dummer, S. Gabriel, C. J. Wu, D. Schadendorf, L. A. Garraway, 
Genomic correlates of response to CTLA-4 blockade in metastatic melanoma. Science 
350, 207–211 (2015).
 10. R. M. Samstein, C. H. Lee, A. N. Shoushtari, M. D. Hellmann, R. Shen, Y. Y. Janjigian, 
D. A. Barron, A. Zehir, E. J. Jordan, A. Omuro, T. J. Kaley, S. M. Kendall, R. J. Motzer, 
A. A. Hakimi, M. H. Voss, P. Russo, J. Rosenberg, G. Iyer, B. H. Bochner, D. F. Bajorin, 
H. A. al-Ahmadie, J. E. Chaft, C. M. Rudin, G. J. Riely, S. Baxi, A. L. Ho, R. J. Wong, 
D. G. Pfister, J. D. Wolchok, C. A. Barker, P. H. Gutin, C. W. Brennan, V. Tabar, 
I. K. Mellinghoff, L. M. DeAngelis, C. E. Ariyan, N. Lee, W. D. Tap, M. M. Gounder, 
S. P. D’Angelo, L. Saltz, Z. K. Stadler, H. I. Scher, J. Baselga, P. Razavi, C. A. Klebanoff, 
R. Yaeger, N. H. Segal, G. Y. Ku, R. P. DeMatteo, M. Ladanyi, N. A. Rizvi, M. F. Berger, N. Riaz, 
D. B. Solit, T. A. Chan, L. G. T. Morris, Tumor mutational load predicts survival after 
immunotherapy across multiple cancer types. Nat. Genet. 51, 202–206 (2019).
 11. M. Łuksza, N. Riaz, V. Makarov, V. P. Balachandran, M. D. Hellmann, A. Solovyov, N. A. Rizvi, 
T. Merghoub, A. J. Levine, T. A. Chan, J. D. Wolchok, B. D. Greenbaum, A neoantigen 
fitness model predicts tumour response to checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. Nature 
551, 517–520 (2017).
 12. N. Riaz, J. J. Havel, V. Makarov, A. Desrichard, W. J. Urba, J. S. Sims, F. S. Hodi, S. Martín-Algarra, 
R. Mandal, W. H. Sharfman, S. Bhatia, W. J. Hwu, T. F. Gajewski, C. L. Slingluff Jr., D. Chowell, 
S. M. Kendall, H. Chang, R. Shah, F. Kuo, L. G. T. Morris, J. W. Sidhom, J. P. Schneck, 
C. E. Horak, N. Weinhold, T. A. Chan, Tumor and microenvironment evolution during 
immunotherapy with nivolumab. Cell 171, 934–949.e16 (2017).
 13. J.-W. Sidhom, C. A. Bessell, J. J. Havel, A. Kosmides, T. A. Chan, J. P. Schneck, Immunomap: 
A bioinformatics tool for t-cell repertoire analysis. Cancer Immunol. Res. 6, 151–162 
(2018).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
10 of 11
 14. B. Rousseau, M. B. Foote, S. B. Maron, B. H. Diplas, S. Lu, G. Argilés, A. Cercek, L. A. Diaz Jr., 
The spectrum of benefit from checkpoint blockade in hypermutated tumors. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 384, 1168–1170 (2021).
 15. S. L. Topalian, J. M. Taube, R. A. Anders, D. M. Pardoll, Mechanism-driven biomarkers to guide 
immune checkpoint blockade in cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 16, 275–287 (2016).
 16. S. Ganesan, J. Mehnert, Biomarkers for response to immune checkpoint blockade. 
Annu. Rev. Cancer Biol. 4, 331–351 (2020).
 17. S.-K. Yoo, D. Chowell, C. Valero, L. G. Morris, T. A. Chan, Pre-treatment serum albumin 
and mutational burden as biomarkers of response to immune checkpoint blockade. 
NPJ Precis. Oncol. 6, 23 (2022).
 18. N. Jacquelot, M. P. Roberti, D. P. Enot, S. Rusakiewicz, N. Ternès, S. Jegou, D. M. Woods, 
A. L. Sodré, M. Hansen, Y. Meirow, M. Sade-Feldman, A. Burra, S. S. Kwek, C. Flament, 
M. Messaoudene, C. P. M. Duong, L. Chen, B. S. Kwon, A. C. Anderson, V. K. Kuchroo, 
B. Weide, F. Aubin, C. Borg, S. Dalle, O. Beatrix, M. Ayyoub, B. Balme, G. Tomasic, 
A. M. di Giacomo, M. Maio, D. Schadendorf, I. Melero, B. Dréno, A. Khammari, R. Dummer, 
M. Levesque, Y. Koguchi, L. Fong, M. Lotem, M. Baniyash, H. Schmidt, I. M. Svane, 
G. Kroemer, A. Marabelle, S. Michiels, A. Cavalcanti, M. J. Smyth, J. S. Weber, 
A. M. Eggermont, L. Zitvogel, Predictors of responses to immune checkpoint blockade 
in advanced melanoma. Nat. Commun. 8, 592 (2017).
 19. D. Miao, C. A. Margolis, N. I. Vokes, D. Liu, A. Taylor-Weiner, S. M. Wankowicz, D. Adeegbe, 
D. Keliher, B. Schilling, A. Tracy, M. Manos, N. G. Chau, G. J. Hanna, P. Polak, S. J. Rodig, 
S. Signoretti, L. M. Sholl, J. A. Engelman, G. Getz, P. A. Jänne, R. I. Haddad, T. K. Choueiri, 
D. A. Barbie, R. Haq, M. M. Awad, D. Schadendorf, F. S. Hodi, J. Bellmunt, K. K. Wong, 
P. Hammerman, E. M. van Allen, Genomic correlates of response to immune checkpoint 
blockade in microsatellite-stable solid tumors. Nat. Genet. 50, 1271–1281 (2018).
 20. V. Anagnostou, N. Niknafs, K. Marrone, D. C. Bruhm, J. R. White, J. Naidoo, K. Hummelink, 
K. Monkhorst, F. Lalezari, M. Lanis, S. Rosner, J. E. Reuss, K. N. Smith, V. Adleff, K. Rodgers, 
Z. Belcaid, L. Rhymee, B. Levy, J. Feliciano, C. L. Hann, D. S. Ettinger, C. Georgiades, 
F. Verde, P. Illei, Q. K. Li, A. S. Baras, E. Gabrielson, M. V. Brock, R. Karchin, D. M. Pardoll, 
S. B. Baylin, J. R. Brahmer, R. B. Scharpf, P. M. Forde, V. E. Velculescu, Multimodal genomic 
features predict outcome of immune checkpoint blockade in non-small-cell lung cancer. 
Nat. Cancer 1, 99–111 (2020).
 21. V. Anagnostou, D. C. Bruhm, N. Niknafs, J. R. White, X. M. Shao, J. W. Sidhom, J. Stein, 
H. L. Tsai, H. Wang, Z. Belcaid, J. Murray, A. Balan, L. Ferreira, P. Ross-Macdonald, 
M. Wind-Rotolo, A. S. Baras, J. Taube, R. Karchin, R. B. Scharpf, C. Grasso, A. Ribas, 
D. M. Pardoll, S. L. Topalian, V. E. Velculescu, Integrative tumor and immune cell 
multi-omic analyses predict response to immune checkpoint blockade in melanoma. 
Cell Rep. Med. 1, 100139 (2020).
 22. J.-W. Sidhom, H. B. Larman, D. M. Pardoll, A. S. Baras, DeepTCR is a deep learning framework 
for revealing sequence concepts within t-cell repertoires. Nat. Commun. 12, (2021).
 23. J.-W. Sidhom, A. S. Baras, Deep learning identifies antigenic determinants of severe 
SARS-CoV-2 infection within t-cell repertoires. Sci. Rep. 11, 14275 (2021).
 24. E. Mahe, T. Pugh, S. Kamel-Reid, T cell clonality assessment: Past, present and future. 
J. Clin. Pathol. 71, 195–200 (2018).
 25. L. Robert, J. Tsoi, X. Wang, R. Emerson, B. Homet, T. Chodon, S. Mok, R. R. Huang, 
A. J. Cochran, B. Comin-Anduix, R. C. Koya, T. G. Graeber, H. Robins, A. Ribas, CTLA4 
blockade broadens the peripheral T-cell receptor repertoire. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 
2424–2432 (2014).
 26. P. Kvistborg, D. Philips, S. Kelderman, L. Hageman, C. Ottensmeier, D. Joseph-Pietras, 
M. J. P. Welters, S. van der Burg, E. Kapiteijn, O. Michielin, E. Romano, C. Linnemann, 
D. Speiser, C. Blank, J. B. Haanen, T. N. Schumacher, Anti–CTLA-4 therapy broadens 
the melanoma-reactive CD8+ T cell response. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 254ra128 (2014).
 27. E. Cha, M. Klinger, Y. Hou, C. Cummings, A. Ribas, M. Faham, L. Fong, Improved survival 
with t cell clonotype stability after anti–CTLA-4 treatment in cancer patients. Sci. Transl. Med. 
6, 238ra70 (2014).
 28. A. C. Hopkins, M. Yarchoan, J. N. Durham, E. C. Yusko, J. A. Rytlewski, H. S. Robins, 
D. A. Laheru, D. T. Le, E. R. Lutz, E. M. Jaffee, T cell receptor repertoire features associated 
with survival in immunotherapy-treated pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. JCI Insight 3, 
e122092 (2018).
 29. P. C. Tumeh, C. L. Harview, J. H. Yearley, I. P. Shintaku, E. J. M. Taylor, L. Robert, 
B. Chmielowski, M. Spasic, G. Henry, V. Ciobanu, A. N. West, M. Carmona, C. Kivork, E. Seja, 
G. Cherry, A. J. Gutierrez, T. R. Grogan, C. Mateus, G. Tomasic, J. A. Glaspy, R. O. Emerson, 
H. Robins, R. H. Pierce, D. A. Elashoff, C. Robert, A. Ribas, PD-1 blockade induces responses 
by inhibiting adaptive immune resistance. Nature 515, 568–571 (2014).
 30. S. A. Hogan, A. Courtier, P. F. Cheng, N. F. Jaberg-Bentele, S. M. Goldinger, M. Manuel, 
S. Perez, N. Plantier, J. F. Mouret, T. D. L. Nguyen-Kim, M. I. G. Raaijmakers, P. Kvistborg, 
N. Pasqual, J. B. A. G. Haanen, R. Dummer, M. P. Levesque, Peripheral blood TCR 
repertoire profiling may facilitate patient stratification for immunotherapy against 
melanoma. Cancer Immunol. Res. 7, 77–85 (2019).
 31. W. Roh, P.-L. Chen, A. Reuben, C. N. Spencer, P. A. Prieto, J. P. Miller, V. Gopalakrishnan, 
F. Wang, Z. A. Cooper, S. M. Reddy, C. Gumbs, L. Little, Q. Chang, W.-S. Chen, K. Wani, 
M. P. De Macedo, E. Chen, J. L. Austin-Breneman, H. Jiang, J. Roszik, M. T. Tetzlaff, 
M. A. Davies, J. E. Gershenwald, H. Tawbi, A. J. Lazar, P. Hwu, W.-J. Hwu, A. Diab, I. C. Glitza, 
S. P. Patel, S. E. Woodman, R. N. Amaria, V. G. Prieto, J. Hu, P. Sharma, J. P. Allison, L. Chin, 
J. Zhang, J. A. Wargo, P. A. Futreal, Integrated molecular analysis of tumor biopsies 
on sequential CTLA-4 and PD-1 blockade reveals markers of response and resistance. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah3560 (2017).
 32. R. N. Amaria, S. M. Reddy, H. A. Tawbi, M. A. Davies, M. I. Ross, I. C. Glitza, J. N. Cormier, 
C. Lewis, W. J. Hwu, E. Hanna, A. Diab, M. K. Wong, R. Royal, N. Gross, R. Weber, S. Y. Lai, 
R. Ehlers, J. Blando, D. R. Milton, S. Woodman, R. Kageyama, D. K. Wells, P. Hwu, S. P. Patel, 
A. Lucci, A. Hessel, J. E. Lee, J. Gershenwald, L. Simpson, E. M. Burton, L. Posada, L. Haydu, 
L. Wang, S. Zhang, A. J. Lazar, C. W. Hudgens, V. Gopalakrishnan, A. Reuben, 
M. C. Andrews, C. N. Spencer, V. Prieto, P. Sharma, J. Allison, M. T. Tetzlaff, J. A. Wargo, 
Neoadjuvant immune checkpoint blockade in high-risk resectable melanoma. Nat. Med. 
24, 1649–1654 (2018).
 33. H. Zhang, L. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Ye, S. Shukla, J. Qiao, X. Zhan, H. Chen, C. J. Wu, 
Y. X. Fu, B. Li, Investigation of antigen-specific t-cell receptor clusters in human cancers. 
Clin. Cancer Res. 26, 1359–1371 (2020).
 34. K. E. Yost, A. T. Satpathy, D. K. Wells, Y. Qi, C. Wang, R. Kageyama, K. L. McNamara, 
J. M. Granja, K. Y. Sarin, R. A. Brown, R. K. Gupta, C. Curtis, S. L. Bucktrout, M. M. Davis, 
A. L. S. Chang, H. Y. Chang, Clonal replacement of tumor-specific t cells following PD-1 
blockade. Nat. Med. 25, 1251–1259 (2019).
 35. M. Sade-Feldman, K. Yizhak, S. L. Bjorgaard, J. P. Ray, C. G. de Boer, R. W. Jenkins, D. J. Lieb, 
J. H. Chen, D. T. Frederick, M. Barzily-Rokni, S. S. Freeman, A. Reuben, P. J. Hoover, 
A. C. Villani, E. Ivanova, A. Portell, P. H. Lizotte, A. R. Aref, J. P. Eliane, M. R. Hammond, 
H. Vitzthum, S. M. Blackmon, B. Li, V. Gopalakrishnan, S. M. Reddy, Z. A. Cooper, 
C. P. Paweletz, D. A. Barbie, A. Stemmer-Rachamimov, K. T. Flaherty, J. A. Wargo, 
G. M. Boland, R. J. Sullivan, G. Getz, N. Hacohen, Defining T cell states associated with 
response to checkpoint immunotherapy in melanoma. Cell 175, 998–1013.e20 (2018).
 36. G. Oliveira, K. Stromhaug, S. Klaeger, T. Kula, D. T. Frederick, P. M. le, J. Forman, T. Huang, 
S. Li, W. Zhang, Q. Xu, N. Cieri, K. R. Clauser, S. A. Shukla, D. Neuberg, S. Justesen, 
G. MacBeath, S. A. Carr, E. F. Fritsch, N. Hacohen, M. Sade-Feldman, K. J. Livak, 
G. M. Boland, P. A. Ott, D. B. Keskin, C. J. Wu, Phenotype, specificity and avidity 
of antitumour CD8+ t cells in melanoma. Nature 596, 119–125 (2021).
 37. N. Tickotsky, T. Sagiv, J. Prilusky, E. Shifrut, N. Friedman, McPAS-TCR: A manually curated 
catalogue of pathology-associated t cell receptor sequences. Bioinformatics 33, 
2924–2929 (2017).
 38. V. P. Balachandran, M. Łuksza, J. N. Zhao, V. Makarov, J. A. Moral, R. Remark, B. Herbst, 
G. Askan, U. Bhanot, Y. Senbabaoglu, D. K. Wells, C. I. O. Cary, O. Grbovic-Huezo, 
M. Attiyeh, B. Medina, J. Zhang, J. Loo, J. Saglimbeni, M. Abu-Akeel, R. Zappasodi, N. Riaz, 
M. Smoragiewicz, Z. L. Kelley, O. Basturk; Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative; 
Garvan Institute of Medical Research; Prince of Wales Hospital; Royal North Shore 
Hospital; University of Glasgow; St Vincent’s Hospital; QIMR Berghofer Medical Research 
Institute; University of Melbourne, Centre for Cancer Research; University of Queensland, 
Institute for Molecular Bioscience; Bankstown Hospital; Liverpool Hospital; Royal Prince 
Alfred Hospital, Chris O’Brien Lifehouse; Westmead Hospital; Fremantle Hospital; St John 
of God Healthcare; Royal Adelaide Hospital; Flinders Medical Centre; Envoi Pathology; 
Princess Alexandria Hospital; Austin Hospital; Johns Hopkins Medical Institutes; ARC-Net 
Centre for Applied Research on Cancer, M. Gönen, A. J. Levine, P. J. Allen, D. T. Fearon, 
M. Merad, S. Gnjatic, C. A. Iacobuzio-Donahue, J. D. Wolchok, R. DeMatteo, T. A. Chan, 
B. D. Greenbaum, T. Merghoub, S. D. Leach, Identification of unique neoantigen qualities 
in long-term survivors of pancreatic cancer. Nature 551, 512–516 (2017).
 39. A. Vitiello, M. Zanetti, Neoantigen prediction and the need for validation. Nat. Biotechnol. 
35, 815–817 (2017).
 40. The problem with neoantigen prediction. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 97 (2017).
 41. S. Paul, D. Weiskopf, M. A. Angelo, J. Sidney, B. Peters, A. Sette, HLA class I alleles are 
associated with peptide-binding repertoires of different size, affinity, 
and immunogenicity. J. Immunol. 191, 5831–5839 (2013).
 42. J. W. Yewdell, Confronting complexity: Real-world immunodominance in antiviral CD8+ 
T cell responses. Immunity 25, 533–543 (2006).
 43. B. M. Carreno, V. Magrini, M. Becker-Hapak, S. Kaabinejadian, J. Hundal, A. A. Petti, A. Ly, 
W. R. Lie, W. H. Hildebrand, E. R. Mardis, G. P. Linette, A dendritic cell vaccine increases 
the breadth and diversity of melanoma neoantigen-specific t cells. Science 348, 803–808 
(2015).
 44. T. Lu, Z. Zhang, J. Zhu, Y. Wang, P. Jiang, X. Xiao, C. Bernatchez, J. V. Heymach, 
D. L. Gibbons, J. Wang, L. Xu, A. Reuben, T. Wang, Deep learning-based prediction 
of the T cell receptor–antigen binding specificity. Nat. Mach. Intell. 3, 864–875 (2021).
 45. G. Isacchini, A. M. Walczak, T. Mora, A. Nourmohammad, Deep generative selection 
models of T and B cell receptor repertoires with sonnia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, 
e2023141118 (2021).
 46. D. S. Fischer, Y. Wu, B. Schubert, F. J. Theis, Predicting antigen specificity of single T cells 
based on TCR CDR3 regions. Mol. Syst. Biol. 16, e9416 (2020).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025


Sidhom et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5089 (2022)     16 September 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES |  RESEARCH ARTICLE
11 of 11
 47. M. Widrich, B. Schäfl, H. Ramsauer, M. Pavlović, L. Gruber, M. Holzleitner, J. Brandstetter, 
G. K. Sandve, V. Greiff, S. Hochreiter, G. Klambauer, Modern Hopfield networks and attention 
for immune repertoire classification, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 
(Curran Associates Inc., 2020), pp. 18832–18845.
 48. I. Springer, H. Besser, N. Tickotsky-Moskovitz, S. Dvorkin, Y. Louzoun, Prediction of specific 
TCR-peptide binding from large dictionaries of TCR-peptide pairs. Front. Immunol. 11, 
1803 (2020).
 49. Y. Tong, J. Wang, T. Zheng, X. Zhang, X. Xiao, X. Zhu, X. Lai, X. Liu, SETE: Sequence-based 
ensemble learning approach for TCR epitope binding prediction. Comput. Biol. Chem. 87, 
107281 (2020).
 50. A. Montemurro, V. Schuster, H. R. Povlsen, A. K. Bentzen, V. Jurtz, W. D. Chronister, 
A. Crinklaw, S. R. Hadrup, O. Winther, B. Peters, L. E. Jessen, M. Nielsen, Nettcr-2.0 enables 
accurate prediction of TCR-peptide binding by using paired TCR and  sequence data. 
Commun. Biol. 4, 1060 (2021).
 51. H. S. Robins, P. V. Campregher, S. K. Srivastava, A. Wacher, C. J. Turtle, O. Kahsai, 
S. R. Riddell, E. H. Warren, C. S. Carlson, Comprehensive assessment of T-cell receptor 
-chain diversity in  T cells. Blood 114, 4099–4107 (2009).
 52. C. S. Carlson, R. O. Emerson, A. M. Sherwood, C. Desmarais, M. W. Chung, J. M. Parsons, 
M. S. Steen, M. A. LaMadrid-Herrmannsfeldt, D. W. Williamson, R. J. Livingston, D. Wu, 
B. L. Wood, M. J. Rieder, H. Robins, Using synthetic templates to design an unbiased 
multiplex PCR assay. Nat. Commun. 4, 2680 (2013).
 53. A. Szolek, B. Schubert, C. Mohr, M. Sturm, M. Feldhahn, O. Kohlbacher, Optitype: Precision 
HLA typing from next-generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics 30, 3310–3316 
(2014).
 54. J.-W. Sidhom, Deep learning reveals predictive sequence concepts within immune 
repertoires to immunotherapy (2022); https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6590167.
Acknowledgments: We thank S. L. Topalian for helpful discussions and critical review of the 
manuscript and V. Anagnostou and V. Velculescu for generating HLA haplotype data from 
WES data collected in this study. We also thank the patients and their families for their participation 
in this study. Funding: We thank Bristol Myers Squibb for sponsoring the CA209-038 clinical 
trial and for funding the analysis presented in this manuscript, along with The Bloomberg 
Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Bloomberg Philanthropies, the Mark Foundation 
for Cancer Research (19-035-ASP), the Hopkins-BMS Immuno-Oncology Consortium, the 
philanthropy of S. Wojcicki and D. Troper in support of Computational Pathology at Johns 
Hopkins, and the NIH Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA006973 for providing resources to 
support the work of developing the algorithmic pipelines presented in this manuscript. 
Author contributions: J.-W.S conceived the project. A.S.B. provided the computational 
resources to develop the algorithms and run the analyses. J.-W.S. and A.S.B. designed the 
experiments, conducted the analyses, wrote the manuscript, and created the figures. 
P.R.-M. and M.W.-R. provided the clinical trial data and oversight of the analysis. G.O. and C.J.W. 
provided data and interpreted the results. D.M.P. and A.S.B. supervised the project, interpreted 
the results, and provided editorial and conceptual input into the manuscript. Competing 
interests: P.R.-M. and M.W.-R. were employees and stockholders for Bristol Myers Squibb at 
the time this work was completed. M.W.-R. also is a stockholder in Agios Pharmaceuticals. 
The other authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials 
availability: All data and code needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in 
the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials and can be found at https://github.com/
sidhomj/DeepTCR_Cancer and https://zenodo.org/record/6590069 (54).
Submitted 12 April 2022
Accepted 29 July 2022
Published 16 September 2022
10.1126/sciadv.abq5089
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 12, 2025
